# PHPStan

PHPStan is a static analysis tool for PHP that checks your code for errors without needing to execute the specific lines or write extra tests.

## Running the tests

PHPStan requires PHP and Composer dependencies to be installed.

If you don't already have an environment ready, you can set one up by following [these instructions](https://github.com/WordPress/wordpress-develop/blob/master/README.md).

Then you can launch the tests by running:

```bash
npm run typecheck:php
```

which will run PHPStan in the Docker container.

Additional flags supported by PHPStan can be passed by passing `--` followed by the flags themselves. For example, 

```bash
# to increase the memory limit from the default 2G to 4G:
npm run typecheck:php -- --memory-limit=4G

# to analyze only a specific file:
npm run typecheck:php -- src/wp-includes/template.php

# To scan with verbose debugging output:
npm run typecheck:php -- -vvv --debug
```

If you are not using the Docker environment, you can run PHPStan via Composer directly:

```bash
composer run phpstan

composer run phpstan -- --memory-limit=4G
composer run phpstan -- src/wp-includes/template.php
composer run phpstan -- -vvv --debug
```

For available flags, see https://phpstan.org/user-guide/command-line-usage.

## The PHPStan configuration

The PHPStan configuration file is located at [`phpstan.neon.dist`](../../phpstan.neon.dist).

You can create a local copy at `phpstan.neon` to override the default configuration.

For more information about configuring PHPStan, see the [PHPStan documentation's Config reference](https://phpstan.org/config-reference).

## Ignoring and baselining errors

As we adopt PHPStan iteratively, you may be faced with false positives due to legacy code, or code that is not worth changing at this time.

PHPStan errors can be ignored in the following ways:

- Using the `@phpstan-ignore {error-identifier} (Reason for ignoring)` annotation in the code itself. This should be used to suppress false positives with a specific line of code.

- Adding the error pattern to the `ignoreErrors` section of the `phpstan.neon.dist` configuration file. This should be used to handle conflicts with WordPress Coding Standards or similar project decisions, or to allowlist legacy code that is not worth refactoring solely to satisfy the tests.

- Adding an error to the "tech debt" baseline. This should be used for code that needs to be addressed eventually - by fixing, refactoring, or ignoring via one of the above methods - but is not worth addressing right now.

	Baselines are a useful triage tool for handling PHPStan errors in legacy code, as they allow us to enforce stricter code quality checks on new code, while gradually chipping away at the existing issues over time. **Avoid adding PHPStan errors from new code whenever possible, and use baselines as a last resort.**

	The baseline file is located at `tests/phpstan/baseline.php` and generated by running PHPStan with the `--generate-baseline` flag:

	```bash
	npm run typecheck:php -- --generate-baseline=tests/phpstan/baseline.php

	# or, with Composer directly:
	composer run phpstan -- --generate-baseline=tests/phpstan/baseline.php
	```

	This will regenerate the baseline file with any new errors added to the existing ones. You can then commit the updated baseline file.

## Performance and troubleshooting

PHPStan can be resource-intensive, especially on large codebases like WordPress. If you encounter memory limit issues, you can increase the memory limit by passing the `--memory-limit` flag as shown [above](#running-the-tests).

PHPStan caches analysis results to speed up subsequent runs. You can see information about the results cache by running `analyse` with the `-vv` or `-vvv` flag.

Sometimes, due to the lack of type information in legacy code, PHPStan may still struggle to analyze certain parts of the codebase. In such cases, you can use the `--debug` flag to disable caching and see which files are causing issues.
